README.md, before:

Overview
====================

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois)
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois)

Galois is a C++ library designed to ease parallel programming, especially for
applications with irregular parallelism (e.g., irregular amount of work in parallel
sections, irregular memory accesses and branching patterns). It implements
an implicitly parallel programming model, where the programmer replaces serial loop
constructs (e.g. for and while) and serial data structures in their algorithms with parallel loop
constructs and concurrent data structures provided by Galois to express their algorithms.
Galois is designed so that the programmer does not have to deal with low-level parallel programming constructs such as
threads, locks, barriers, condition variables, etc. 

Highlights include:
- Parallel *for_each* loop that handles dependencies between iterations, as well as
  dynamic work creation, and a *do_all* loop for simple parallelism. Both provide load balancing and excellent
  scalability on multi-socket systems
- A concurrent graph library designed for graph analytics algorithms as well as
  other domains such as irregular meshes. 
- Scalable concurrent containers such as bag, vector, list, etc. 

Galois is released under the BSD-3-Clause license. 


Building Galois
===========================

You can checkout the latest release by typing (in a terminal):

```Shell
git clone -b release-4.0 https://github.com/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois
```

The master branch will be regularly updated, so you may try out the latest
development code as well by checking out master branch:

```Shell
git clone https://github.com/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois
```

Dependencies
--------------

Galois builds, runs, and has been tested on GNU/Linux. Even though
Galois may build on systems similar to Linux, we have not tested correctness or performance, so please
beware. 

At the minimum, Galois depends on the following software:

- A modern C++ compiler compliant with the C++-14 standard (GCC >= 6.1, Intel >= 17.0, LLVM >= 4.0)
- CMake (>= 3.2.3)
- Boost library ( >= 1.58.0, we recommend building/installing the full library)


Here are the dependencies for the optional features: 

- Linux HUGE_PAGES support (please see [www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/vm/hugetlbpage.txt](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/vm/hugetlbpage.txt)). Performance will most likely degrade without HUGE_PAGES
  enabled. Galois uses 2MB huge page size and relies on the kernel configuration to set aside a large amount of 2MB pages. For example, our performance testing machine (4x14 cores, 192GB RAM) is configured to support up to 65536 2MB pages:
  ```Shell
  cat /proc/mem_info | fgrep Huge
  AnonHugePages:    104448 kB
  HugePages_Total:   65536
  HugePages_Free:    65536
  HugePages_Rsvd:        0
  HugePages_Surp:        0
  Hugepagesize:       2048 kB
  ```
   
- libnuma support. Performance may degrade without it. Please install
  libnuma-dev on Debian like systems, and numactl-dev on Red Hat like systems. 
- Doxygen (>= 1.8.5) for compiling documentation as webpages or latex files
- PAPI (>= 5.2.0.0 ) for profiling sections of code
- Vtune (>= 2017 ) for profiling sections of code
- MPICH2 (>= 3.2) if you are interested in building and running distributed system
  applications in Galois
- CUDA (>= 8.0) if you want to build distributed hetergeneous applications
- Eigen (3.3.1 works for us) for some matrix-completion app variants


Compiling Galois
--------------------------
We use CMake. Let's assume that SRC_DIR is the directory where the source code for Galois resides, and you wish to build galois in some BUILD_DIR. Run the following commands to set up a build directory:

```Shell
SRC_DIR=`pwd` # Or top-level Galois source dir
BUILD_DIR=<path-to-your-build-dir>
mkdir -p $BUILD_DIR; cd $BUILD_DIR; cmake $SRC_DIR
```

By default, cmake sets up a "Release" build. You can also set up a "Debug" build,
as follows:

```Shell
mkdir -p $BUILD_DIR; cd $BUILD_DIR; cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug $SRC_DIR
```

Galois applications are in `lonestar` directory.  In order to build a particular application:

```Shell
cd $BUILD_DIR/lonestar/<app-dir-name>; make -j
```

You can also build everything by running `make -j` in the top-level of build directory, but that may
take a lot of time and will download additional files.

More esoteric systems may require a toolchain file; check `../cmake/Toolchain`
if there is a file corresponding to your system. If so, use the following
CMake command:

```Shell
cmake -C ${SRC_DIR}/cmake/Toolchain/${platform}-tryrunresults.cmake \
  -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=${SRC_DIR}/cmake/Toolchain/${platform}.cmake ${SRC_DIR}
```


Running Galois Applications
=============================

Inputs
-------

We provide a few sample inputs that can be downloaded by running:

```Shell
make input
```

'make input' will download a big (~2GB) tar-ball of inputs  and extract it to
`$BUILD_DIR/inputs/reference` directory. The tar-ball is downloaded to
`$BUILD_DIR/inputs`

Many Galois/Lonestar applications work with graphs. We store graphs in a binary format
called *galois graph file* 
(`.gr` file extension). Other formats such as edge-list or Matrix-Market can be
converted to `.gr` format with `graph-convert` tool provided in galois. 
You can build graph-convert as follows:

```Shell
cd $BUILD_DIR
make graph-convert
./tools/graph-convert --help
```

Other applications, such as Delaunay Mesh Refinement may read special file formats
or some may even generate random inputs on the fly. 

Running
---------

All Lonestar applications take a `-t` command-line option to specify the number of
threads to use. All applications run a basic sanity check (often insufficient for
correctness) on the program output, which can be turned off with the `-noverify` option. You 
can specify `-help` command-line option to print all available options. 

Upon successful completion, each application will produce some stats regarding running
time of various sections, parallel loop iterations and memory usage, etc. These
stats are in CSV format and can be redirected to a file using `-statFile` option.
Please refer to the manual for details on stats. 

Running Distributed Galois
---------

Please refer to `dist_apps/README.md` for more details on
running distributed benchmarks.

Documentation
====================

Galois documentation is produced using doxygen, included in this repository, which includes a tutorial, a user's
manual and API documentation for the Galois library. 

Users can build doxygen documentation in the build directory using:

```Shell
cd $BUILD_DIR
make doc
your-fav-browser html/index.html &
```

See online documentation at:
 [http://iss.ices.utexas.edu/?p=projects/galois](http://iss.ices.utexas.edu/?p=projects/galois)


Source-Tree Organization
========================

- `libgalois` contains the source code for the shared-memory Galois library, e.g., runtime, graphs, worklists, etc. 
- `lonestar` contains the Lonestar benchmark applications and tutorial examples for Galois
- `libdist` contains the source code for the distributed-memory and heterogeneous Galois library
- `dist_apps` contains the source code for the distributed-memory and heterogeneous
  benchmark applications. Please refer to `dist_apps/README.md` for instructions on
  building and running these apps. 
- `tools` contains various helper programs such as graph-converter to convert
  between graph file formats and graph-stats to print graph properties



Installing Galois as a library
==============================
If you want to install Galois as a library. Assuming that you wish to install
Galois under INSTALL_DIR:

```Shell
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=${INSTALL_DIR} ${SRC_DIR}
make install
```

or, to speed up compilation,

```Shell
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=${INSTALL_DIR} -DSKIP_COMPILE_APPS=1 ${SRC_DIR}
make install
```


Using Installed Galois
-------------------------
If you are using CMake, put something like the following CMakeLists.txt:

```CMake
set(CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH ${INSTALL_DIR}/lib/cmake/Galois ${CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH})
find_package(Galois REQUIRED)
include_directories(${Galois_INCLUDE_DIRS})
set(CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER ${Galois_CXX_COMPILER})
set(CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS  "${Galois_CXX_FLAGS} ${CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS}")
add_executable(app ...)
target_link_libraries(app ${Galois_LIBRARIES})
```

Using basic commands (although the specific commands vary by system):

```Shell
c++ -std=c++14 app.cpp -I${INSTALL_DIR}/include -L${INSTALL_DIR}/lib -lgalois_shmem
```

Contact Us
==========
For bugs, please raise an issue here at gihub using the 'Issues' tab [https://github.com/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois/issues](https://github.com/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois/issues).
Please send questions and comments to Galois users mailing list: [galois-users@utlists.utexas.edu](galois-users@utlists.utexas.edu). You may subscribe at
[https://utlists.utexas.edu/sympa/subscribe/galois-users](https://utlists.utexas.edu/sympa/subscribe/galois-users). 

If you find a bug, it would help us if you sent (1) the command and program output and (2)
a gdb backtrace, preferably with the debug build. Assuming you will build Galois in
BUILD_DIR, while the source is in SRC_DIR:

```Shell
script Galois-errors-log.txt
mkdir -p $BUILD_DIR
cd $BUILD_DIR
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug $SRC_DIR
make VERBOSE=1
gdb --args path/to/failing/program args
(gdb) r
(gdb) bt
(gdb) q
exit
```

This will generate a file Galois-errors-log.txt, which you can send to the mailing list:[galois-users@utlists.utexas.edu](galois-users@utlists.utexas.edu) for further debugging or open a github issue.

Commit message:

Update docs on building Galois.

README.md, after:

Overview
====================

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois.svg?style=svg)](https://circleci.com/gh/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois)
[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois)

Galois is a C++ library designed to ease parallel programming, especially for
applications with irregular parallelism (e.g., irregular amount of work in parallel
sections, irregular memory accesses and branching patterns). It implements
an implicitly parallel programming model, where the programmer replaces serial loop
constructs (e.g. for and while) and serial data structures in their algorithms with parallel loop
constructs and concurrent data structures provided by Galois to express their algorithms.
Galois is designed so that the programmer does not have to deal with low-level parallel programming constructs such as
threads, locks, barriers, condition variables, etc. 

Highlights include:
- Parallel *for_each* loop that handles dependencies between iterations, as well as
  dynamic work creation, and a *do_all* loop for simple parallelism. Both provide load balancing and excellent
  scalability on multi-socket systems
- A concurrent graph library designed for graph analytics algorithms as well as
  other domains such as irregular meshes. 
- Scalable concurrent containers such as bag, vector, list, etc. 

Galois is released under the BSD-3-Clause license. 


Building Galois
===========================

You can checkout the latest release by typing (in a terminal):

```Shell
git clone -b release-4.0 https://github.com/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois
```

The master branch will be regularly updated, so you may try out the latest
development code as well by checking out master branch:

```Shell
git clone https://github.com/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois
```

Dependencies
--------------

Galois builds, runs, and has been tested on GNU/Linux. Even though
Galois may build on systems similar to Linux, we have not tested correctness or performance, so please
beware. 

At the minimum, Galois depends on the following software:

- A modern C++ compiler compliant with the C++-14 standard (GCC >= 6.1, Intel >= 17.0, LLVM >= 4.0)
- CMake (>= 3.2.3)
- Boost library ( >= 1.58.0, we recommend building/installing the full library)


Here are the dependencies for the optional features: 

- Linux HUGE_PAGES support (please see [www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/vm/hugetlbpage.txt](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/vm/hugetlbpage.txt)). Performance will most likely degrade without HUGE_PAGES
  enabled. Galois uses 2MB huge page size and relies on the kernel configuration to set aside a large amount of 2MB pages. For example, our performance testing machine (4x14 cores, 192GB RAM) is configured to support up to 65536 2MB pages:
  ```Shell
  cat /proc/mem_info | fgrep Huge
  AnonHugePages:    104448 kB
  HugePages_Total:   65536
  HugePages_Free:    65536
  HugePages_Rsvd:        0
  HugePages_Surp:        0
  Hugepagesize:       2048 kB
  ```
   
- libnuma support. Performance may degrade without it. Please install
  libnuma-dev on Debian like systems, and numactl-dev on Red Hat like systems. 
- Doxygen (>= 1.8.5) for compiling documentation as webpages or latex files
- PAPI (>= 5.2.0.0 ) for profiling sections of code
- Vtune (>= 2017 ) for profiling sections of code
- MPICH2 (>= 3.2) if you are interested in building and running distributed system
  applications in Galois
- CUDA (>= 8.0) if you want to build distributed hetergeneous applications
- Eigen (3.3.1 works for us) for some matrix-completion app variants


Compiling Galois
--------------------------
We use CMake. Let's assume that SRC_DIR is the directory where the source code for Galois resides, and you wish to build galois in some BUILD_DIR. Run the following commands to set up a build directory:

```Shell
SRC_DIR=`pwd` # Or top-level Galois source dir
BUILD_DIR=<path-to-your-build-dir>
mkdir -p $BUILD_DIR; cd $BUILD_DIR; cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release $SRC_DIR
```

You can also set up a "Debug" build by running the following instead of the last command above:

```Shell
mkdir -p $BUILD_DIR; cd $BUILD_DIR; cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug $SRC_DIR
```

Galois applications are in `lonestar` directory.  In order to build a particular application:

```Shell
cd $BUILD_DIR/lonestar/<app-dir-name>; make -j
```

You can also build everything by running `make -j` in the top-level of build directory, but that may
take a lot of time.

Setting the `BUILD_SHARED_LIBS` to `ON` when calling CMake will make the core runtime library be built as a shared object instead of a static library.

Once the core library has been built, it can be installed by running

```Shell
make install
```

The apps will not be installed by default.

The tests for the core runtime will be built by default when you run `make` with no target specified.
They can be built specifically by running
```Shell
cd $BUILD_DIR/test
make -j
make test
```

Most of the Galois apps have tests that can be run as well, but these tests depend on downloading the reference inputs, unpacking the corresponding tarball into a directory, and specifying the directory with the unpacked sample inputs.
More on that further down.


Running Galois Applications
=============================

Inputs
-------

We provide a few sample inputs that can be downloaded by running:

```Shell
make input
```

'make input' will download a big (~2GB) tar-ball of inputs  and extract it to
`$BUILD_DIR/inputs/reference` directory. The tar-ball is downloaded to
`$BUILD_DIR/inputs`

Many Galois/Lonestar applications work with graphs. We store graphs in a binary format
called *galois graph file* 
(`.gr` file extension). Other formats such as edge-list or Matrix-Market can be
converted to `.gr` format with `graph-convert` tool provided in galois. 
You can build graph-convert as follows:

```Shell
cd $BUILD_DIR
make graph-convert
./tools/graph-convert --help
```

Other applications, such as Delaunay Mesh Refinement may read special file formats
or some may even generate random inputs on the fly. 

Running
---------

All Lonestar applications take a `-t` command-line option to specify the number of
threads to use. All applications run a basic sanity check (often insufficient for
correctness) on the program output, which can be turned off with the `-noverify` option. You 
can specify `-help` command-line option to print all available options. 

Upon successful completion, each application will produce some stats regarding running
time of various sections, parallel loop iterations and memory usage, etc. These
stats are in CSV format and can be redirected to a file using `-statFile` option.
Please refer to the manual for details on stats. 

Running Distributed Galois
---------

Please refer to `dist_apps/README.md` for more details on
running distributed benchmarks.

Documentation
====================

Galois documentation is produced using doxygen, included in this repository, which includes a tutorial, a user's
manual and API documentation for the Galois library. 

Users can build doxygen documentation in the build directory using:

```Shell
cd $BUILD_DIR
make doc
your-fav-browser html/index.html &
```

See online documentation at:
 [http://iss.ices.utexas.edu/?p=projects/galois](http://iss.ices.utexas.edu/?p=projects/galois)


Source-Tree Organization
========================

- `libgalois` contains the source code for the shared-memory Galois library, e.g., runtime, graphs, worklists, etc. 
- `lonestar` contains the Lonestar benchmark applications and tutorial examples for Galois
- `libdist` contains the source code for the distributed-memory and heterogeneous Galois library
- `dist_apps` contains the source code for the distributed-memory and heterogeneous
  benchmark applications. Please refer to `dist_apps/README.md` for instructions on
  building and running these apps. 
- `tools` contains various helper programs such as graph-converter to convert
  between graph file formats and graph-stats to print graph properties



Installing Galois as a library
==============================
If you want to install Galois as a library. Assuming that you wish to install
Galois under INSTALL_DIR:

```Shell
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=${INSTALL_DIR} ${SRC_DIR}
make install
```

or, to speed up compilation,

```Shell
cmake -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX=${INSTALL_DIR} -DSKIP_COMPILE_APPS=1 ${SRC_DIR}
make install
```


Using Installed Galois
-------------------------
If you are using CMake, put something like the following CMakeLists.txt:

```CMake
set(CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH ${INSTALL_DIR}/lib/cmake/Galois ${CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH})
find_package(Galois REQUIRED)
include_directories(${Galois_INCLUDE_DIRS})
set(CMAKE_CXX_COMPILER ${Galois_CXX_COMPILER})
set(CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS  "${Galois_CXX_FLAGS} ${CMAKE_CXX_FLAGS}")
add_executable(app ...)
target_link_libraries(app ${Galois_LIBRARIES})
```

Using basic commands (although the specific commands vary by system):

```Shell
c++ -std=c++14 app.cpp -I${INSTALL_DIR}/include -L${INSTALL_DIR}/lib -lgalois_shmem
```

Contact Us
==========
For bugs, please raise an issue here at gihub using the 'Issues' tab [https://github.com/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois/issues](https://github.com/IntelligentSoftwareSystems/Galois/issues).
Please send questions and comments to Galois users mailing list: [galois-users@utlists.utexas.edu](galois-users@utlists.utexas.edu). You may subscribe at
[https://utlists.utexas.edu/sympa/subscribe/galois-users](https://utlists.utexas.edu/sympa/subscribe/galois-users). 

If you find a bug, it would help us if you sent (1) the command and program output and (2)
a gdb backtrace, preferably with the debug build. Assuming you will build Galois in
BUILD_DIR, while the source is in SRC_DIR:

```Shell
script Galois-errors-log.txt
mkdir -p $BUILD_DIR
cd $BUILD_DIR
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug $SRC_DIR
make VERBOSE=1
gdb --args path/to/failing/program args
(gdb) r
(gdb) bt
(gdb) q
exit
```

This will generate a file Galois-errors-log.txt, which you can send to the mailing list:[galois-users@utlists.utexas.edu](galois-users@utlists.utexas.edu) for further debugging or open a github issue.
