.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH TLBMISS_COST.SH 8 "16 December, 2009"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
tlbmiss_cost.sh \- Measure the cost in CPU cycles of a TLB miss
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tlbmiss_cost.sh [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBtlbmiss_cost.sh\fP uses oprofile or calibator to calculate the cost in CPU
cycles of servicing a TLB miss.  The method used depends on the architecture
where the script is being run.  On POWERPC, oprofile is used with the STREAM
benchmark (available here: http://www.cs.virginia.edu/stream/FTP/Code/stream.c).
On X86 and X86-64, calibrator is used (source available here:
http://homepages.cwi.nl/~manegold/Calibrator/v0.9e/calibrator.c)
These programs will need to be in place and available to \fBtlbmiss_cost.sh\fP
in order for \fBcpupcstat\fP to calculate the percentage of time spent servicing
TLB misses automatically.  \fBtlbmiss_cost.sh\fP can fetch and build these
programs for you with the appropriate options.

The following options can be used to configure how \fBtlbmiss_cost.sh\fP works:

.TP
.B --calibrator </path/to/calibrator>

This option allows the user to specify the location of the \fBcalibrator\fP
tool.  If this is not specified the script will check the path and the current
working directory for \fBcalibrator\fP

.TP
.B --stream </path/to/STREAM>

This option allows the user to specify the location of the \fBSTREAM\fP
benchmarking tool (note that is this is not \fBstream(1)\fP).  If this is not
specified the script will check the path and the current working directory for
\fBSTREAM\fP

.TP
.B --verbose

This option increases the verbosity of the ouput.

.TP
.B --quiet

This option decreases the verbosity of the output.

.TP
.B --fetch-calibrator

This option has the script attempt to fetch the source for \fBcalibrator\fP,
builds it, and makes it available to \fBtlbmiss_cost.sh\fP

.TP
.B --fetch-stream

This option has the script attempt to fetch the source for \fBSTREAM\fP, builds
it, and makes it available to \fBtlbmiss_cost.sh\fP

.SH SEE ALSO
.I cpupcstat(8)
.br
.SH AUTHORS
Eric B Munson <ebmunson@us.ibm.com> is the primary author. See the documentation
for other contributors.

